Key facts

Primary health care can cover the majority of a person’s health needs throughout their life –from prevention and treatment to rehabilitation and palliative care.
At least half of the world’s 7.3 billion people still lack full coverage with essential health services.
Only 8 of 30 countries for which data is available spend at least US$ 40 per person on primary health care per year.
A fit-for-purpose workforce is essential to deliver primary health care, yet the world has an estimated shortfall of 18 million health workers.
It will be impossible to achieve health for all without addressing the social, economic, environmental and commercial determinants of health, which generally are beyond the health sector.



What is primary health care?
Primary health care is an approach to health and wellbeing centred on the needs and circumstances of individuals, families and communities.  It addresses comprehensive and interrelated physical, mental and social health and wellbeing.  
It is about providing whole-person care for health needs throughout life, not just treating a set of specific diseases. Primary health care ensures people receive comprehensive care, ranging from promotion and prevention to treatment, rehabilitation and palliative care as close as feasible to people’s every day environment.
Primary health care is rooted in a commitment to social justice and equity and in the recognition of the fundamental right to the highest attainable standard of health, as echoed in article 25 in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights: “Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services […]”.
The concept of primary health care has been repeatedly reinterpreted and redefined.  In some contexts, it has referred to the provision of ambulatory or first-level of personal health care services. In other contexts, primary health care has been understood as a set of priority health interventions for low-income populations (also called selective primary health care). Others have understood primary health care as an essential component of human development, focusing on the economic, social and political aspects.  
WHO has developed a cohesive definition based on three components:

ensuring people’s health problems are addressed through comprehensive promotive, protective, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative care throughout the life course, strategically prioritizing key system functions aimed at individuals and families (e.g. primary care) and the population (e.g. public health) as the central elements of integrated service delivery across all levels of care; 
systematically addressing the broader determinants of health (including social, economic, environmental, as well as people’s characteristics and behaviours) through evidence-informed public policies and actions across all sectors; and
empowering individuals, families, and communities to optimize their health, as advocates for policies that promote and protect health and wellbeing, as co-developers of health and social services through their participation, and as self-carers and care-givers to others.

Why is primary health care important?
Renewing primary health care and placing it at the centre of efforts to improve health and wellbeing are critical for three reasons:

Primary health care is well-positioned to be able to respond to rapid economic, technological, and demographic changes, all of which impact health and well-being.  A recent analysis found that approximately half of the gains in reducing child mortality from 1990 to 2010 were due to factors outside the health sector (water and sanitation, education, economic growth). A primary health care approach draws in a wide range of stakeholders to examine and change policies to address the social, economic, environmental and commercial determinants of health and well-being.  Treating people and communities as key actors in the production of their own health and wellbeing is critical for understanding and responding to the complexities of our changing world.
Primary health care has been proven to be a highly effective and efficient way to address the main causes and risks of poor health and wellbeing today, as well as handling the emerging challenges that threaten health and wellbeing tomorrow. It has also been shown to be a good value investment, as there is evidence that quality primary health care reduces total healthcare costs and improves efficiency by reducing hospital admissions. Addressing increasingly complex health needs calls for a multisectoral approach that integrates health-promoting and preventive policies, solutions that are responsive to communities, and health services that are people-centred.  Primary health care also includes the key elements needed to improve health security and prevent health threats such as epidemics and antimicrobial resistance, through such measures as community engagement and education, rational prescribing, and a core set of essential public health functions, including surveillance.  Strengthening systems at the community and peripheral health facility level contributes to building resilience, which is critical for withstanding shocks to the health system.
Stronger primary health care is essential to achieving the health-related Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and universal health coverage. It will contribute to the attainment of other goals beyond the health goal (SDG3), including those on poverty, hunger, education, gender equality, clean water and sanitation, work and economic growth, reducing inequality and climate action.

WHO response
WHO recognizes the central role of primary health care for achieving health and wellbeing for all, at all ages.  WHO works with countries to:

Identify priority areas for improving health and context-specific approaches which draw on the technical expertise across the WHO.
Support countries to develop inclusive policies, in country leadership and health systems based on primary health care which promote health equity, and works towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and universal health coverage. 
Address the wider inequity and social determinants of health through multisectorial action.